
This version is a

I rewrote large parts of the code, mainly because I had different ideas about maintainability then I have now
it had become partly because it beca

Version 3 is the result of refactoring of most of the code,


Whenever a TopTools window has keyboard focus, the user can press Ctrl-C to copy the webcolor representation of the pointed pixel to the Windows clipboard.



New in version 3.0

Loupe

I rewrote the loupe from scratch, attempts to make the loupe sizable made clear this was the only sane option.

Well, it is sizable now, it got a toolbar, the view can be frozen (ie. detached from mouse movement) and currently it uses "layered display".
On machines running Windows 2000 or Windows XP, the loupe window sits on it's own layer, so it doesn't show up in it's own view (it is fully transparent for itself).

Let me extend a bit on this feature:
After a user asked if it was possible to have a transparent ruler, I experimented a bit with layered windows, a feature offered by the OS since Windows 2000.
It let me make the ruler transparent and it looked really nice, but it rendered it pretty useless also, because the transparent ruler was not visible for the loupe anymore..
That was unacceptable, so I dropped attempts to add a transparency feature to the ruler.
Then I realized the advantage of such a feature when applied to the loupe itself! No more funny feedback effects when the mousepointer is over the loupe, it just shows what is underneath the loupe window!

It turns out that in order to render a window transparent it must first be made layered (in jargon: the WS_EX_LAYERED bit in the extended windows style mask must be set to 1).
Just setting this bit makes the window invisible, because by default it then is 100% transparent.
It can be made visible by calling the "SetLayeredWindowAttributes" API function, passing it a transparency value less then 100%
Setting transparency to 0 makes the window fully opaque, but it still sits on it's own layer, a layer not visible to the loupe..



Screen grabber

A problem in capturing screenshots with the mouse is that an application only receives mouse messages when the mouse is above one of it's windows. A way to receive all mouse messages in the system is to use a "mouse hook", but this requires the code to be in a separate DLL and this DLL will be attached to every running program with a visible window.
Another strategy is to make a copy of the entire screen and then display this copy in a full-screen borderless window. Because this windows now covers the entire desktop, it will receive all mouse events.
In version 2 I used the latter approach because I wanted TopTools to be unintrusive, lean, and without dependencies upon external resources.
A drawback is that it freezes the screen, everything that changes on the desktop (ie. the clock) will not be visible until the capture session is complete.
A year ago I read an article by Jeffrey Richter in which he describes a technique to keep receiving mouse messages by using a "journal record hook" (Jeffrey Richter's Win32 Q&A column in Microsoft Systems Journal, April 1995 — Vol 10 No 4), nice thing is that a journal hook doesn't require a separate DLL.
So that is new in the screen grabber.
Also new is that it is able to save snapshots in PNG format.


Options Dialog

Ruler:


Global hotkey:
In version 2.4 I added functionality to the Info window so that pressing Ctrl-C would copy the selected color in #ABCDEF webcolor format.
That is neat, but it only workes when one of the TopTools windows has the keyboard focus.
A global hotkey works regardless of which window (or even what desktop) is active, it acts global for the entire machine.
The hotkey can be configured in the options dialog, you can also select the color representation there.
Photoshop for instance doesn't like #ABCDEF, you get #ABCDE, but when typing HTML it is more convenient to have the '#' and have surrounding quotes ("#ABCDEF").
A leading '#' is annoying in Photoshop, it prefers ABCDEF (or you get #ABCDE), but when typing HTML it is more convenient to have the '#' and have surrounding quotes ("#ABCDEF").
The format settings apply to both the hotkey action and the classic Ctrl-C action (which still works).


General:
All tool windows now feature a "snap to screen border". You can override this behaviour by holding down the Ctrl key while moving the window.

Keyboard shortcut overview:

tool     modifiers   key          effect

ruler               arrows    move ruler  1 pixel
              ctrl  arrows    move cursor 1 pixel
        shift       arrows    move ruler  10 pixels
        shift ctrl  arrows    move cursor 10 pixels
        ctrl /      numpad /  toggle orientation

loupe   ctrl +      numpad +  zoom in
        ctrl -      numpad -  zoom out
        ctrl                  toggle crosshair
        ctrl                  toggle grid
                              toggle centerbox
                    spacebar  freeze/unfreeze


System Notification Area (more commonly referred to as "system-tray"):

When I wrote the original version of TopTools, the tray wasn't as crowded as it is nowadays, and I confess: at that time I thought it was a pretty cool feature.
Nowadays I try to avoid programs that insist to recide in the notification area while doing no notification at all.
Programs like ZoneAlarm and Process Explorer use these icons to give feedback, they notify the user of network or cpu activity.
On the other hand, certain mediaplayers and certain hardware vendors put a lot of effort in poluting this part of the desktop (I am not sure what they try to achieve here, didn't they learn anything from the [Realplayer] debacle?).
gaining what, except annoyed and confused users?).
With the collapsable tray area of WinXP (which was a smart move to discourage cluttering it), and my own disenchantment with not having any option to enforce "normal" behaviour on these, otherwise useful programs.

